.TH SPM\-FSCK 8 "June 2026" "spm 0.1.0" "System Manager's Manual"
.SH NAME
spm\-fsck \- Check and repair spm database integrity
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B spm fsck
[\fB\-\-fix\fR] [\fB\-\-files\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Check the spm database for consistency and integrity issues.
.P
\fBspm fsck\fR verifies that:
.IP \(bu 2
All installed packages have valid metadata records
.IP \(bu 2
File records are consistent with installed packages
.IP \(bu 2
No orphaned file records exist in the database
.IP \(bu 2
Package references (dependencies, conflicts) are valid
.P
Without flags, \fBspm fsck\fR performs a read-only check and reports
any issues it finds without making modifications.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-\-fix\fR
Attempt to repair any detected issues automatically.
Orphaned file records are removed, missing metadata is restored
from available sources, and inconsistent references are corrected.
.TP
\fB\-\-files\fR
Additionally verify that all recorded file paths exist on disk.
Files that are missing on disk but recorded in the database are
reported as inconsistencies.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
0
No issues found (or all issues were fixed with \fB\-\-fix\fR).
.TP
1
Issues were detected and not fixed (no \fB\-\-fix\fR flag).
.SH EXAMPLES
.IP \(bu 2
\fBspm fsck\fR
Check database integrity (read-only).
.IP \(bu 2
\fBspm fsck \-\-fix\fR
Check and automatically repair issues.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBspm fsck \-\-files\fR
Check database integrity and verify files on disk.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBspm fsck \-\-fix \-\-files\fR
Full check and repair including file verification.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR spm (8),
.BR spm\-sync (8),
.BR spm\-init (8)
.SH AUTHOR
Samad Package Manager <spm@samad.iq>
