.TH SPM\-INIT 8 "June 2026" "spm 0.1.3" "System Manager's Manual"
.SH NAME
spm\-init \- Initialize spm directory structure, database, and backends
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B spm init
[\fB\-\-root\fR=\fIpath\fR] [\fB\-\-from-system\fR] [\fB\-\-fix-backend\fR] [\fB\-\-install-daemon\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Initialize the spm runtime environment.  \fBspm init\fR creates the
necessary directory structure, sets up the SQLite database with the
current schema, and prepares the package cache, archives, and backend
storage directories.
.P
This command is typically run during initial setup, after a fresh
install, or when recovering from a corrupted backend store.
.SS Backend Initialization
SPM manages its own backend binaries (dnf, apt-get, rpm, dpkg, etc.)
in isolation from the system.  Backends are stored in:
.P
.nf
  /var/lib/spm/store/backend/{name}/bin/{name}
.fi
.P
During initialization, SPM copies bundled backends from
\fB/usr/libexec/spm/backend/\fR into this store directory.  This
ensures SPM continues to work even if the system package manager
is removed.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-\-root\fR=\fIpath\fR
Initialize spm under a custom root directory instead of the default
\fB/var/lib/spm\fR.  Useful for chroot environments, containers, or
alternate installation targets.
.TP
\fB\-\-from-system\fR
After initialization, immediately import all currently installed
packages from the system's native package manager (dpkg or rpm) into
the spm database.  This is equivalent to running \fBspm sync\fR after
\fBspm init\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-fix-backend\fR
Reinstall backend binaries from the bundled directory
(\fB/usr/libexec/spm/backend/\fR) into the spm store
(\fB/var/lib/spm/store/backend/\fR).  This fixes cases where backend
binaries have been accidentally removed or corrupted.  Automatically
enabled when \fB\-\-root\fR or \fB\-\-from-system\fR is used.
.TP
\fB\-\-install-daemon\fR
Install the \fBspmd\fR systemd service unit and start the daemon.
Writes \fB/etc/systemd/system/spmd.service\fR, runs
\fBsystemctl daemon-reload\fR, \fBsystemctl enable spmd\fR,
and \fBsystemctl start spmd\fR.  Requires root privileges.
.SH FILES
.TP
\fB/var/lib/spm/metadata.db\fR
SQLite database storing all package metadata.
.TP
\fB/var/lib/spm/packages/\fR
Extracted package data per installed package.
.TP
\fB/var/lib/spm/store/backend/\fR
Managed backend binaries (dnf, apt-get, rpm, dpkg, etc.).
.TP
\fB/var/cache/spm/archives/\fR
Cached SAM archive files.
.TP
\fB/etc/spm/repos.d/*.list\fR
Repository configuration files.
.TP
\fB/usr/libexec/spm/backend/\fR
Bundled backend binaries shipped with the spm package.
.SH EXAMPLES
.IP \(bu 2
\fBspm init\fR
Initialize spm with default settings.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBspm init \-\-fix-backend\fR
Reinstall backend binaries from the bundled directory.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBspm init \-\-from-system\fR
Initialize and import all existing packages.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBspm init \-\-root /mnt/chroot\fR
Initialize spm for a chroot environment.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBspm init \-\-install-daemon\fR
Install spmd systemd service and start the daemon.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR spm (8),
.BR spm\-sync (8),
.BR spm\-fsck (8)
.SH AUTHOR
Samad Package Manager <spm@samad.iq>
