.TH SPM 8 "June 2026" "spm 0.1.2" "System Manager's Manual"
.SH NAME
spm \- Samad Package Manager, a universal Linux package manager
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B spm
\fIcommand\fR [\fIoptions\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBspm\fR is a universal Linux package manager that works with
native SAM packages and foreign formats (deb, rpm).  It supports
cross-distro installations (install Debian packages on Fedora, etc.),
dependency resolution, sandboxed installations, repository management,
cryptographic signing, and a privilege-separated daemon.
.P
The \fBspmd\fR daemon automatically refreshes repository metadata
(configurable via \fBspm config set auto_update_interval <seconds>\fR).
.P
SPM can operate in three modes:
.IP \fBParasite mode\fR (default)
Leverages apt/dnf as managed backends for foreign packages.
.IP \fBSmart mode\fR (\fB\-\-smart\fR)
Isolates libraries via RPATH/store for cross-distro compatibility.
.IP \fBSandbox mode\fR (\fB\-\-sandbox\fR)
Full namespace isolation (PID, mount, network, UTS) with read-only root.
.SS Backend Architecture
SPM is the \fIsole package manager\fR visible to the user.  The underlying
system package managers (dnf, apt, rpm, dpkg) are never called directly.
Instead, SPM manages them as backend binaries stored in:
.P
.nf
  /var/lib/spm/store/backend/{name}/bin/{name}
.fi
.P
When a backend is resolved, SPM checks in order:
.IP 1. 3
Store-managed copy (\fB/var/lib/spm/store/backend/\fR)
.IP 2. 3
Bundled copy shipped with spm (\fB/usr/libexec/spm/backend/\fR)
.P
The system \fBPATH\fR is never consulted.  This means removing dnf or
apt from the system does not affect SPM's ability to use them.
.P
If backends are missing, SPM displays a warning at the start of every
command.  Run \fBspm init \-\-fix-backend\fR to restore them from the
bundled directory.
.P
The \fBspmd\fR daemon can be installed as a systemd service with
\fBspm init \-\-install-daemon\fR.  This ensures the daemon starts
at boot and survives terminal session termination.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS Package Management
.TP
.BR install ", " i
Install packages from repositories or local files.
Supports \fB\-\-sandbox\fR, \fB\-\-smart\fR, \fB\-\-replace\fR, \fB\-y\fR.
.TP
.BR remove ", " r
Remove installed packages.  Preserves conffiles.
.TP
.BR purge ", " p
Remove packages along with their configuration and conffiles.
.TP
.BR autoremove
Remove orphaned packages (no other package depends on them).
.TP
.BR update ", " u
Fetch the latest repository metadata from all sources.
.TP
.BR upgrade ", " upg
Upgrade all (or specific) installed packages to the latest version.
Supports \fB\-\-prefer\-newest\fR.
.TP
.BR dist\-upgrade
Full distribution upgrade: upgrades all packages, removes obsoleted,
and removes orphaned packages in one operation.
.SS Query Commands
.TP
.BR search ", " s
Search configured repositories for packages by name or description.
.TP
.BR global-search ", " gs
Search remote package sources (Debian API, COPR API) across distributions.
.TP
.BR info ", " show
Show detailed information about an installed package.
.TP
.BR files ", " ls
List files owned by an installed package.
.TP
.BR depends ", " deps
Show direct dependencies of a package (queries SPM DB first, falls back to apt-cache/dnf).
.TP
.BR rdepends ", " rdeps
Show packages that depend on the given package.
.TP
.BR search\-file
Find which installed package owns a given file path.
Queries SPM DB file index first, falls back to dpkg -S / rpm -qf.
.SS System Commands
.TP
.BR init
Initialize SPM directory structure, database, and backends.
See \fBspm\-init\fR(8).
.TP
.BR sync
Synchronize the SPM database with system package state (dpkg/rpm).
See \fBspm\-sync\fR(8).
.TP
.BR fsck
Check and repair database integrity.
See \fBspm\-fsck\fR(8).
.TP
.BR cleanup
Clean orphaned files, package cache, and temporary data.
.TP
.BR history ", " log
View transaction history or undo a past transaction.
.TP
.BR snapshot ", " snap
Create or rollback Btrfs snapshots.
.SS Administrative Commands
.TP
.BR repo ", " repository
Manage repositories (add, list, remove, create, publish, gen-key, sign).
.TP
.BR config
View or modify SPM configuration (auto_update_interval, sandbox level, etc.).
.TP
.BR group
Manage the \fBspm\fR UNIX group for daemon access control.
.TP
.BR detect
Detect hardware (GPU, kernel) and suggest or install drivers.
.TP
.BR analyze ", " an
Analyze the system for orphaned files, conflicts, or file traces.
.SS Development Commands
.TP
.BR build ", " b
Build a .sam package from a source directory.
.TP
.BR index
Rebuild the SONAME index from cached repository metadata.
.SS Sandbox Commands
.TP
.BR sandbox
Manage sandboxed packages: list sandboxes or run commands inside them.
.TP
.BR ps
List processes using deleted files (lsof-style).
.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-\-help\fR
Show help information.
.TP
\fB\-\-version\fR
Show version information.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
\fBSPM_ROOT\fR
Override the root directory for all SPM paths.  Enables isolated
E2E testing and chroot usage without sudo.
.TP
\fBSPM_UNSAFE=1\fR
Allow installation of packages with unknown or missing signatures.
.TP
\fBSPM_BIN\fR
Override the spm binary path for integration tests.
.SH FILES
.TP
\fB/etc/spm/spm.conf\fR
System-wide configuration file.
.TP
\fB~/.config/spm/spm.conf\fR
User-specific configuration file.
.TP
\fB/etc/spm/repos.d/*.list\fR
Repository configuration files.
.TP
\fB/var/lib/spm/metadata.db\fR
Package metadata SQLite database.
.TP
\fB/var/lib/spm/store/\fR
Nix-style content-addressed package store (sharded by hash).
.TP
\fB/var/lib/spm/store/backend/\fR
Managed backend binaries (dnf, apt, rpm, dpkg, etc.).
.TP
\fB/usr/libexec/spm/backend/\fR
Bundled backend binaries shipped with the spm package.
.TP
\fB/var/lib/spm/packages/\fR
Extracted package data per installed package.
.TP
\fB/var/cache/spm/archives/\fR
Cached package archive files.
.TP
\fB/run/spm/spmd.sock\fR
Daemon UNIX socket (path respects \fB$SPM_ROOT\fR).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR spm\-sync (8),
.BR spm\-fsck (8),
.BR spm\-init (8),
.BR spm\-repo\-gen\-key (8),
.BR spm\-repo\-sign (8)
.SH AUTHOR
Samad Package Manager <spm@samad.iq>
